{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf190
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13480\viewh10220\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 1. Income differences\
Income differences in Finland have increased rapidly since the mid-1990s. What should one do about it?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Income differences may grow freely\
A2	Income differences may grow moderately\
A3	Income differences are appropriate\
A4	Income differences must be reduced slightly\
A5	Income differences must be reduced significantly\
\
\
2. Gay adoption rights\
In 2009, the Parliament passed a legislation that allows gay and lesbian couples to adopt each other\'92s children. Should they also be allowed to adopt outside the family?\
\
3. Nuclear power plant permissions\
In Spring 2009, the government grant permissions to two new nuclear power plants. The third applicant, Fortum, did not receive the permission, but is hopeful to get granted a permission to replace two of their reactors in Loviisa. Should this permission be granted?\
\
4. Child allowances\
Child allowance is paid for each child living in Finland until they\'92re 17 years old, irrespective of the parents\'92 income. What should be done for child allowances?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Child allowances should be removed from high-income families\
A2	Child allowances should be adjusted to parents\'92 income\
A3	Keep current status\
A4	Child allowance should not affect the income support\
\
5. Senior\'92s care guarantee \
The Ministry of Social Affairs and Health is currently planning the so-called Age Law. The law might contain regulations on the minimum quality of care for senior people. Should these requirements be degreed by law and should municipalities provide subjective right for care to all elderly people?\
AN	No. Municipalities\'92 tasks should not be increased.\
AN	No. It is enough that seniors\'92 care level is set by recommendations.\
A0	N/A\
AY	Yes. Seniors should have a subjective right for good care.\
\
6. Retirement age\
The current age of retirement to old-age pension is between 63 and 68 years. In my mind, the youngest age for old-age pension should be:\
A0	N/A\
A1	Raised by multiple years\
A2	Reduced\
A3	Raised by one year\
A4	Kept as it is\
\
7. Extending working careers\
The current average retirement age in Finland is below 60 years. Main reason for premature retirement is disability. What of the following methods would you use as the primary method for extending working careers.\
A0	N/A\
A1	I would remove the option for part-time retirement\
A2	I would use these all\
A3	I would remove the right to extended unemployment allowance before the retirement\
A4	I would increase the minimum retirement age from 63 years\
A5	I would not use any of these\
\
8. Bend index\
Since mid-90s, the old-age benefits are adjusted based on what is known as the bend index. Eighty per cent of the index is based on the consumer price index and 20 percent on the average income index. The bend index has meant that the old-age benefits have grown slower than the average income. What should be done to the bend index?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Average income should have larger effect to the index than consumer prices\
A2	Consumer prices should have larger effect to the index than average income\
A3	The current index is fine\
A4	The index should follow the income slightly more\
A5	The index should be changed back as it used to be, i.e. half income, half consumer prices\
\
9. Cutting public expenditure \
The new government might decide to cut the public expenditure. Below are some cost-cutting measures that have been proposed. Which one of these would you select first?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Social benefits should not be bound on indices\
A2	Transfer of money from the state to the municipalities should be reduced\
A3	The subjective right for daycare should be abandoned\
A4	State expenditure does not have to be cut\
A5	Child allowances should be removed from high-income families\
A6	Support for agriculture should be cut\
A7	Support for businesses should be cut\
A8	Development aid funds should be reduced\
A9	Something else\
A10	Military spending should be reduced\
\
10. Greek debt\
Finland, along with the other Eurozone countries, has helped to save other Eurozone countries with hundreds of billions of euros worth of support. In Spring 2010, Finland agreed to loan 1.6 billion euros to Greece. Furthermore, Finland agreed to guarantee European Financial Stability Facility\'92s  750 billion euro loaned capital with over 8 billion euros. This might not be enough in the long run. Which of the following claims is closest to your opinions?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Finland should support the other countries in the name of European solidarity\
A2	Finland should abandon the Eurozone as soon as possible\
A3	Joining the Eurozone was a mistake that we must now pay for\
A4	Greece should have been put to debt restructuring to avoid the risk of reduced moral in public spending\
A5	Supporting Greece and Ireland was a mistake as each country should deal with their own issues\
A6	Supporting the countries that were in trouble was in Finland\'92s interests, as bankruptcy of any country in the Eurozone would endanger the economy in the whole zone.\
\
11. Transaction tax\
The financial crisis has increased the demands to tax the financial sector and to force it to take part in paying the damages. The European Commission has proposed the global transaction tax to tax bond, stock, currency, and derivative transactions. Which of the following claims is closest to your opinions?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Transaction tax makes loaning money harder for privates and businesses alike, weakening the economic growth. It should not be used under any circumstances.\
A2	EU should collect transaction taxes even if the rest of the world does not\
A3	Transaction tax should be used, but only if it is globally collected\
\
12. Tax increases\
Which of the following forms of tax would you be most willing to increase?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Real-estate tax\
A2	Business income tax\
A3	Income tax\
A4	None of these\
A5	Energy tax\
A6	No taxes should be raised at all\
A7	Value-added tax\
A8	I would return the capital tax\
A9	Capital-income tax\
\
13. Tax deductions\
Taxes are used not only to collect money but also to support certain types of actions by giving them tax deductions. In year 2009 the government lost 13 billion euros of tax income \'97 about one quarter of the annual budget \'97 due to the deductions. To cover these loses, other taxes must be increased. Which of the following deductions would you cut first?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Tax-free status of housing benefit (lost tax income: 280 Me in 2009)\
A2	Tax-free status of child allowances (lost tax income: 510 Me in 2009)\
A3	Household-work deduction (lost tax income: 245 Me in 2009)\
A4	Employee-benefit deductions (lost tax income: 260 Me in 2009)\
A5	Labour union fee\'92s reduction from income (lost tax income: 210 Me in 2009)\
A6	Tax-free status of home-seller\'92s profits (lost tax income: 900 Me in 2009)\
A7	None of these\
\
14. Mortgage interest\'92s tax deduction\
What should be done for mortgage interest\'92s tax deduction right?\
A0	N/A\
A1	The tax deduction right should be extended\
A2	It should be removed completely\
A3	It should be removed gradually with long transition period\
A4	It should be kept as is\
\
15. Real-estate tax\
Real-estate tax is collected from land meant or used for building. Should the tax be extended to forests and fields as well?\
\
16. Conscription\
Universal male conscription is practiced in Europe only in Greece and Cyprus, in addition to Finland. How should the Finnish conscript system be organized?\
A0	N/A\
A1	The conscription should be extended to females\
A2	The conscript system should be abolished\
A3	The military service should be volunteer for both sexes\
A4	The conscript system should be more selective\
A5	The current system is fine\
\
17. NATO\
Should Finland apply for NATO membership?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Yes, if also Sweden applies\
A2	Yes, as soon as possible\
A3	Yes, but during the next election term\
A4	Not at least during the next election term\
A5	Never\
\
18. Human rights\
Should Finland emphasize human rights and democracy in foreign relationships with China and Russia?\
A0	N/A\
A1	No, financial interest should be given priority\
A2	No, domestic politics of China and Russia are not Finland\'92s business\
A3	Yes, but only jointly with the rest of EU\
A4	Yes, Finnish foreign policy should be founded on human rights and democracy\
\
19. Russian land-owners\
From the begin of the year, Russia has banned foreigns to own real estates from its border regions. In Finland, there is virtually no restrictions on foreign land owners and in recent years, Russians have bought thousands of real estates from Finland. What would be the proper course of action?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Foreigners\'92 right to buy land and real estates should generally be restricted in Finland\
A2	Finland should not restrict foreigners\'92 right to buy land or real estates\
A3	Finland should restrict Russians\'92 right to buy land and real estates to achieve parity in the legislation\
\
20. Development aid\
Finland has agreed on UN\'92s goal of increasing the development aid funds to 0.7 per cent of GDP by 2015. Last year, Finland paid 965.6 million euros in development aid, that is, 0.55 percent of GDP. What should be done to development aid?\
A0	N/A\
A1	State money should not be used on development aid\
A2	Development aid should not be increased\
A3	Development aid should not be reduced\
A4	Development aid should be moderately increased if the financial status allows\
A5	Finland should follow its agreement and increase the development aid to 0.7 per cent during the next election term\
\
21. Facebook\
Choose three countries from below that Finland should ask for its Facebook friends, should Finland have a Facebook account.\
A0	N/A\
A1	Iran\
A2	Italy\
A3	Turkey\
A4	Poland\
A5	Tunis\
A6	Spain\
A7	Ghana\
A8	Tanzania\
A9	Iceland\
A10	Bolivia\
A11	France\
A12	Brazil\
A13	UK\
A14	Canada\
A15	India\
A16	Israel\
A17	Cuba\
A18	China\
A19	Denmark\
A20	USA\
A21	Germany\
A22	Estonia\
A23	Norway\
A24	Russia\
A25	Sweden\
\
22. Gun legislation\
In Fall 2010, the permission to own firearms was made harder to obtain; for example, the minimum age for owning a handgun was raised to 20 years. What should be done to the gun legislation?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Gun legislation should be loosened\
A2	Handguns should be made illegal\
A3	Storing handguns to home should be illegal\
A4	Current gun legislation is fine\
\
23. Other domestic language\
In the compulsory school, the students must study two languages that are not their mother tongue. One of these languages must be the other domestic language. Should studying the other domestic language be made volunteer?\
\
24. Suvivirsi hymn\
Is is acceptable to sing the Suvivirsi hymn in the end-of-school-year event?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Yes, but atheists and followers of other religions must have alternative program\
A2	No, religious ceremonies do not belong to school\
A3	Yes, if atheists and followers of other religions do not have to take part on the singing\
A4	Yes, it is part of the Finnish tradition\
\
25. Immigration policy\
2007-2011 electoral term saw Finnish immigration policy becoming more strict. What is your opinion about the current immigration policy of Finland?\
A0	N/A\
A1	It is too strict\
A2	It is too loose\
A3	It is fine\
\
26. Saimaa ringed seal\
Saimaa ringed seal is endangered species, with population of approximately 270 individuals. Some estimates consider its extinction \'94very probable.\'94 So far, the conservation efforts have been based mostly on volunteer actions, such as fishing restrictions. How should the conservation be done?\
A0	N/A\
A1	The conservation measures are already too much\
A2	Fishing with nets should be completely banned in the whole Lake Saimaa\
A3	In addition of completely banning net fishing in the whole Lake Saimaa also building on the shores should be made harder\
A4	Current conservation measures are enough\
A5	Fishing with nets should be banned on the areas where the seal nests\
\
27. Municipal outsourcing\
Municipal have outsourced their services in recent years, and the pressure to outsource more is increasing. Which of the following claims best matches with your opinions?\
A0	N/A\
A1	All services provided by the municipalities should be opened for competition and the municipalities should automatically outsource all services\
A2	Outsourcing should be increased as private companies are more effective on producing the services but municipalities have the final word on what to outsource\
A3	None of these\
A4	Outsourced services should be returned back to the municipalities. Municipalities have legal obligation to provide these services, so they should also produce them\
A5	Outsourcing should be increased, but municipalities should learn to request the quotes and chose the providers more carefully\
A6	Outsourcing should not be increased from the current level, as outsourcing has the risk of reduced quality and does not provide significant savings\
\
28. Number of municipalities\
The number of municipalities in Finland has reduced to 336 due to mergers. The goal of the mergers is to improve the efficiency, as many small municipalities have issues on producing their required services. What would be a good number of municipalities is Finland?\
A0	N/A\
A1	More than 400\
A2	340-400\
A3	Less than 170\
A4	170-229\
A5	230-289\
A6	290-339\
\
29. Capital Region mergers\
Merging the municipalities in the Capital Region area has been discussed for long time. Per proponents, the mergers would help on planning the traffic and use of land. The leadership of Helsinki are in support of the mergers, while their counterparts in Espoo and Vantaa are against it. Also the future Parliament and government have their words to say. What should be done?\
A0	N/A\
A1	The merger must happen, even if the government must force it\
A2	Current status is fine\
A3	The municipalities should be kept, but the area should have a new, elected regional council that should be responsible for most of the tasks the municipalities currently handle\
A4	Collaboration should be increased, but based on voluntary\
\
30. Equalization transfers\
Government transfers money from richer to poorer municipalities to balance their fiscal state. The system guarantees every municipality fiscal income that is 91.86 per cent of the average municipal fiscal income. The largest payers of the system are Helsinki and Espoo: 500 million euros of municipal taxes are transferred from them to poorer municipalities. How should one think about the system?\
A0	N/A\
A1	Equalization system should be abolished\
A2	Capital region should transfer more municipal income to elsewhere in country\
A3	Capital region should be allowed to keep more of their municipal tax income\
A4	The curernt system is fine\
\
31. Parties in government\
Name exactly three parties you think should definitely be part of the next government.\
A0	N/A\
A1	Communist Labour Party (KTP)\
A2	Finland\'92s Labour Party (STP)\
A3	Seniors\'92 Party\
A4	Freedom Party\
A5	On the Poors\'92 Cause\
A6	Independency Party\
A7	Change 2011\
A8	Pirate Party\
A9	Finland\'92s Communist Party (SKP)\
A10	Swedish People\'92s Party of Finland (RKP)\
A11	Christian Democrats\
A12	Left Alliance\
A13	Green Party\
A14	True Finns\
A15	National Coalition\
A16	Centre Party\
A17	Social Democratic Party (SDP)}